Social Consensus vs Code Is Law (#1067)
ethereumclassic/ethereumclassic.github.io: content/blog/2023-01-25-ethereums-social-consensus-vs-ethereum-classics-code-is-law/index.md

Social Consensus has nearly zero marginal cost and risk. Proof of work requires risk taking, competitive merit, and sunk capital.

And this is where they are confused. Proof of work is purposely costly and unscalable computationally precisely to guarantee the benefits of decentralization, which is correctly measured by its social scalability: Anyone in the world may use a Code Is Law blockchain. Only a subset of the world may use Social Consensus networks.

Another deep misunderstanding of Social Consensus supporters is that they believe that proof of work is centralized through mining pools and ASIC computing. This kind of thinking is incomprehensible at this point because after 14 years of operation of Bitcoin, and 7 years of Ethereum as a proof of work chain until the migration to proof of stake, both chains have never been centralized or captured by mining pools, mining firms, ASIC producers, or any other kind of agent.

> To the contrary, proof of stake, with its Social Consensus philosophy, was captured [from the start](https://www.mevwatch.info/) when Ethereum migrated to that system as more than 70% of their blocks are censored by government agencies due to international sanctions policies.

Reviewer: Line 58: Pronoun agreement; Rewrite for accuracy
```suggestion
To the contrary, proof of stake, with its Social Consensus philosophy, was captured [from the start](https://www.mevwatch.info/) when Ethereum migrated to that system as more than 70% of its blocks are censored on behalf of government agencies due to international sanctions policies.
```

Nakamoto Consensus is based on proof of work and can only be based on proof of work because it is the only way to assure the consensus of machines owned by strangers, spread across the world, who don't talk to each other, have no reason to trust each other, and who, in their complete isolation and without consulting anyone, reach absolute consensus on the state of the system every 10 minutes in the case of Bitcoin and every 15 seconds in the case of Ethereum Classic.

Cryptography, economics, and social agreement are just marginal tools and methods used to implement the system, they are not the keys to the design and its security. 

It was the enormous amount of electricity needed, the enormous amount of computational power required, the difficulty adjustment, and the importation of this information from the real physical world into the system that was the revolutionary solution to the problem of consensus and safety in the network.

> Social Consensus' lack of acknowledgement of this truth and their naive refocusing on human virtue as a security measure is the major flaw of that philosophy.

Reviewer: Line 68: Spelling correction; Pronoun agreement
```suggestion
Social Consensus' lack of acknowledgment of this truth and its naive refocusing on human virtue as a security measure is the major flaw of that philosophy.
```

> This flaw makes them believe in several falsehoods, one of which is that a blockchain is a sort of "crypto-economic organism" or some sort of righteous organization of people who will always be good for the world.

Reviewer: Line 70: Pronoun agreement (implied)
```suggestion
This flaw fosters a belief in several falsehoods, one of which is that a blockchain is a sort of "crypto-economic organism" or some sort of righteous organization of people who will always be good for the world.
```

Social Consensus focuses on economics and virtue rather than physics and energy.

Social Consensus glorifies "the community", considers it the security of last resort, and believes that human voluntary agreement is what ultimately protects the accounts, property, dapps, and contracts inside a blockchain.

> We would argue, that a Social Consensus network is not even a blockchain. Blocks are defined as batches of data that have to be sealed with a proof of work hash that must cost block producers enormous amounts of capital and energy.  

Reviewer: Line 76: Unnecessary comma
```suggestion
We would argue that a Social Consensus network is not even a blockchain. Blocks are defined as batches of data that have to be sealed with a proof of work hash that must cost block producers enormous amounts of capital and energy.  
```

> The ultimate purpose of Social Consensus is to protect the planet, to do no harm to the environment, and to heal the climate. The whole reason of existence of Bitcoin, Ethereum Classic and other true blockchains is human flourishing through trust minimization. 

Reviewer: Line 78: Rewrite awkward structure.
```suggestion
The ultimate purpose of Social Consensus is to protect the planet, to do no harm to the environment, and to heal the climate. The whole reason for the existence of Bitcoin, Ethereum Classic and other true blockchains is human flourishing through trust minimization. 
```

Indeed, proof of work actually helps the environment as an externality much more than proof of stake because renewable energy is cheaper than fossil fuel electricity, and miners are constantly seeking to lower their costs so they naturally move to renewable energy sources, providing cash flow to that segment of the industry and promoting its growth. 

> As Social Consensus believes in human agency, but human agency is prone to cheating, then penalties through slashing are required. Also, forks to reverse the chain, confiscate funds, slash bad actors, and change the history of the chain by majority voting are perfectly fine in that philosophy. If trust in intermediaries and human intervention were never the problem, then why was "trust minimization" even a  concern?

Reviewer: Line 82: Correct spacing
```suggestion
As Social Consensus believes in human agency, but human agency is prone to cheating, then penalties through slashing are required. Also, forks to reverse the chain, confiscate funds, slash bad actors, and change the history of the chain by majority voting are perfectly fine in that philosophy. If trust in intermediaries and human intervention were never the problem, then why was "trust minimization" even a concern?
```

> Of course, Social Consensus has very little awareness of the perils that their actions and intervention will bring. It is unlikely that any actor in the network that is slashed by social consensus will passively accept a significant loss of their capital without a fight. Lawsuits and legal bureaucracy will be the name of the game in the Social Consensus world.

Reviewer: Line 84: Pronoun agreement
```suggestion
Of course, Social Consensus has very little awareness of the perils that such actions and interventions will bring. It is unlikely that any actor in the network that is slashed by social consensus will passively accept a significant loss of their capital without a fight. Lawsuits and legal bureaucracy will be the name of the game in the Social Consensus world.
```

> In Social Consensus philosophy, "finality" is defined as a 66% vote of validators. This seems to be strong for the naive eye, but it is just a mirage. It really means that with only 33% of bad actors the network may be disrupted. This has been the vulnerability that has existed in computing networks since they were invented.

Reviewer: Line 86: Correct preposition usage; Comma added
```suggestion
In Social Consensus philosophy, "finality" is defined as a 66% vote of validators. This seems to be strong to the naive eye, but it is just a mirage. It really means that with only 33% of bad actors, the network may be disrupted. This has been the vulnerability that has existed in computing networks since they were invented.
```

To describe finality as a vote, is like saying that finality can be decreed by law or by a government. It is precisely because this is not true that Satoshi Nakamoto invented Bitcoin, Ethereum Classic exists, and Cypherpunks had been working on these technologies for decades.

> However, people are the last defense for Social Consensus advocates, governance is paramount as an emergency response, and The DAO hard fork is regarded as an accomplishment.

Reviewer: Line 90: Correct spacing
```suggestion
However, people are the last defense for Social Consensus advocates, governance is paramount as an emergency response, and TheDAO hard fork is regarded as an accomplishment.
```

## Ethereum Classic's Code Is Law

In Ethereum Classic the term "Code Is Law" has been unequivocal, unambiguous, determined, and clear since the day that Ethereum split from the original blockchain on July 20th of 2016 on block 1,920,000.

Code Is Law is as inextricably linked to proof of work as Social Consensus must escape it. Proof of work is the most secure consensus mechanism known to humankind for reaching consensus on the state of a peer to peer network.

Code Is Law is a principles first philosophy, all the rest comes after.

Code Is law means unstoppability, no downtime, censorship resistance, and the thorough minimization of the influence of third parties. These features are the only ones that can guarantee that the network will not be captured or influenced by special interests.

Code Is Law advocates believe in freedom from censorship, immutability, and that decentralized applications must run exactly as programmed.

> Immutability, decentralization, and complete neutrality, which means no intervention by supposedly virtuous humans, is the only way to guarantee zero discrimination of anyone. Code Is Law beliefs include pseudo anonymity,  decentralization, a rejection of decisions by voting, and a rejection of irregular state changes  to the network.

Reviewer: Line 104: Correct preposition; Correct spelling; Correct spacing
```suggestion
Immutability, decentralization, and complete neutrality, which means no intervention by supposedly virtuous humans, is the only way to guarantee zero discrimination against anyone. Code Is Law beliefs include pseudo-anonymity,  decentralization, a rejection of decisions by voting, and a rejection of irregular state changes to the network.
```
